RSFs (#72)
mlsa-book/MLSA: book/P3C14_forests.qmd

It is therefore no surprise that *random survival forests*, remain a popular and well-performing model in the survival setting.

## Random Forests for Regression

Training of decision trees can include a large number of hyper-parameters and different training steps including 'growing' and subsequently 'pruning'.
However, when utilised in random forests, many of these parameters and steps can be safely ignored, hence this section only focuses on the components that primarily influence the resulting random forest.
This section will start by discussing decision trees and will then introduce the *bagging* algorithm used to create random forests.

### Decision Trees

*Decision trees* are a (relatively) simple machine learning model that are comparatively easy to implement in software and are highly interpretable.
The decision tree algorithm takes an input, a dataset, selects a variable that is used to partition the data according to some *splitting rule* into distinct non-overlapping datasets or *nodes* or *leaves*, and repeats this step for the resulting partitions, or *branches*, until some criterion has been reached.
The final nodes are referred to as *terminal nodes*.

> This is made clearer by example, (@fig-surv-ranfor) demonstrates a decision tree predicting the age of passengers on the Titanic using as variables: the class the passenger was on (first, second, third) (`Pclass`), their sex, and whether they survived (`Survived`).

Author: I agree. I wanted to use a regression example for the link to survival but I guess probabilistic classificaiton works here to. What do you think? Make it classification, use a different dataset, or add a line like "this is clearly a silly example" ?

> This is made clearer by example, (@fig-surv-ranfor) demonstrates a decision tree predicting the age of passengers on the Titanic using as variables: the class the passenger was on (first, second, third) (`Pclass`), their sex, and whether they survived (`Survived`).

Reviewer: hm, I think I'd prefer a) or b), with tendency to b) in order to avoid confusion

In regression, the most common splitting rule is to select a variable and cut-off (i.e., a threshold on the variable at which to separate observations) that minimises the mean squared error in the two potential resulting leaves.

For all decision tree and random forest algorithms going forward, let $L$ denote some leaf, then let $L_{xy}, L_x, L_y$ respectively be the set of observations, features, and outcomes in leaf $L$.
Let $L_{y;i}$ be the $i$th outcome in $L_y$ and finally let $L_{\bar{y}} = \mean[|L_y|]{L_{y;i}}$ be the mean outcome in leaf $L$.
To simplify notation, $i \in L$ is taken to be equivalent to $i \in \{i: X_i \in L_X\}$, i.e. the indices of the observations in leaf $L$.

Let $c \in \Reals$ be some cutoff parameter and let $L^a_{xy}(j,c) := \{(X_i,Y_i)|X_{ij} < c, i = 1,...,n\}, L^b_{xy}(j,c) = \{(X_i,Y_i)|X_{ij} \geq c, i = 1,...,n\}$ be the two leaves containing the set of observations resulting from partitioning variable $j$ at cutoff $c$.
Then a split is determined by finding the arguments, $(j^*,c^*)$ that minimise the sum of the mean squared errors (MSE) in both leaves  [@Hastie2013],
$$

> (j^*, c^*) = \argmin_{j, c} \sum_{y \in L^a_{y}(j,c)} (y - L^a_{\bar{y}}(j,c))^2 + \sum_{y \in L^b_{y}(j,c)} (y - L^b_{\bar{y}}(j,c))^2

Author: Minimising RSS is equivalent to minimising MSE, the equation is RSS the text is MSE, updated text

In the example above, the final prediction would be $y = 34$, note how the final predictions are statistics based on training data, which means all potential predictions can be saved in the original trained mode and no complex computations are required during prediction.

### Random Forests

Decision trees often overfit the training data, hence they have high variance, perform poorly on new data, and are not robust to even small changes in the original training data.
Moreover, important variables can end up being ignored as only subsets of dominant variables are selected for splitting.

To counter these problems, *random forests* are preferred to improve prediction accuracy and decrease variance.
Random forests utilise bootstrap aggregation, or *bagging*  [@Breiman1996a], to aggregate many decision trees.
Bagging is a relatively simple algorithm, as follows:

1. **For** $b = 1,...,B$:
2. $D_b \gets \text{ Randomly sample with replacement } \dtrain$

> 3. $D_{b;p} \gets \text{ Randomly subset features of } D_b$

Author: you're right

#### Probabilistic Predictions {.unnumbered .unlisted}

Starting with the most common survival prediction type, the algorithm requires a simple estimate for the underlying survival distribution in each of the terminal nodes, which can be estimated using the Kaplan-Meier or Nelson-Aalen methods [@Hothorn2004; @Ishwaran2008; @LeBlanc1993; @Segal1988].

<!-- FIXME: REF KM DEFINITION ABOVE -->

By convention, the Nelson-Aalen estimator is used more commonly for RSFs and is thus focused on in this section, but the same logic follows for the Kaplan-Meier estimator.

Once the Nelson-Aalen estimate for the cumulative hazard function is estimated for individual trees, the question is then how how to combine them to create a single random forests prediction.
As Nelson-Aalen estimates produce discrete hazard functions, the same bagging algorithm can be used relatively simply by averaging the estimated hazard probability at each observed time-point [@Hothorn2004].
See @fig-surv-ranfor-lung for an example using the `lung` dataset [@pkgsurvival].

> Let $b_m \in \{1,...,b_M\}$ be a terminal node in a survival decision tree, $b$, with $b_M \in \PReals$ terminal nodes, then if an observation, $x$, lands in terminal node $b_m$, its predicted cumulative hazard is given by,

Author: My notation is meant to be saying that M is dependent on b. So tree 'b' has 'b_M' terminal nodes, whereas tree 'c' has 'c_M' terminal nodes. So it should be 1,...,b_M. Let me know if that doesn't make sense... also M \in \mathbb{N} (or N^+ N^* N_1) not \mathbb{N}_0 because can't have 0 terminal node?

$$
\hat{H}_b(\tau) = \sum_{\{i: i \in L^{b_m} \cap t_i \leq \tau\}} \frac{o_i}{n_i}
$$ {#eq-surv-nelson}

> where $o_i$ and $n_i$ are the observed number of events, and the observations at risk, respectively at time $t_i$.

Author: I think it's right how it currently is - https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Nelson%E2%80%93Aalen_estimator

The bootstrapped predicted is the cumulative hazard function or survival function averaged over individual trees.
Note that understanding what these bootstrapped functions represents depends on how they are calculated.
By definition, a mixture of $n$ distributions with cumulative distribution functions $F_i, i = 1,...,n$ is given by

$$
F(x) = \sum^n_{i=1} w_i F_i(x)
$$

Subsituting $F = 1 - S$ and noting $\sum w_i = 1$ gives the computation $S(x) = \sum^n_{i=1} w_i S_i(x)$, allowing the bootstrapped survival function to exactly represent the mixture distribution averaged over all trees:

$$
\hat{S}_{Boot}(\tau|\xx^*) = \frac{1}{B} \sum^B_{b=1} w_i\hat{S}_b(\tau|\xx^*)
$$ {#eq-surv-kaplan-boot}

usually with $w_i = 1/B$ where $B$ is the number of trees.

> In contrast, if one were to instead substitute $F = 1 - exp(-H)$, then the mixture distrubution depends on a logarithmic function that can only be approximated computed if predicted survival probabilites are close to one, which is an assumption that deteriorates over time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In contrast, if one were to instead substitute $F = 1 - \exp(-H)$, then the mixture distribution depends on a logarithmic function that can only be approximately computed if predicted survival probabilities are close to one, which is an assumption that deteriorates over time.
```

Therefore, to ensure the bootstrapped prediction accurately represents the underlying mixed probability distribution, the bootstrapped cumulative hazard function should be computed as:

$$
\hat{H}_{Boot}(\tau|\xx^*) = - \log (\hat{S}_{Boot}(\tau|\xx^*))
$$ {#eq-surv-nelson-boot}

Another practical consideration to take into account is how to average the survival probabilities over the decision trees as each individual Kaplan-Meier estimate may have been trained on different time points.
This is overcome by recognising that the Kaplan-Meier estimation results in a piece-wise function that can be linearly interpolated between training data.

> @fig-surv-ranfor-bootstrap demonstrates this process for three decision trees (panel a), where the survival probability is calculated at all possible time points (panels b-c), and the average is computed with linear interpolation added between time-points (panel d).

Reviewer: maybe make it explicit for time point2? S_Boot = (0.55 + 1 + 1)/3

> ![Bootstrapping Kaplan-Meier estimators across three decision trees (red, blue, green). Panel a) shows the individual estimates, b) shows the time points to aggregate the trees over, c) is the predicted survival probability from each tree at the desired time points, and d) is the average survival probabilities connected by a step function.](Figures/forests/bootstrap.png){#fig-surv-ranfor-bootstrap fig-alt="Four panels with 't' on x-axis and 'S(t)' on y-axis. Panel a) shows three survival functions as piece-wise linearly decreasing step functions. Panel (b) shows the same but with vertical dotted lines added at all time-points. Panel (c) shows dots at each of the intersections between the vertical lines and the plotted decision trees. Panel (d) shows a single line with dots which are the average of the points in panel (c)."}

Reviewer: The overploting in c) might be confusing to some

Extensions to competing risks follow naturally using bootstrapped cause-specific cumulative incidence functions.

<!-- FIXME - ANDREAS TO ADD DETAILS ON COMPETING RISKS -->

#### Deterministic Predictions {.unnumbered .unlisted}

As discussed in @sec-eval-det, predicting and evaluating survival times is a complex and fairly under-researched area.
For RSFs, there is an inclination to estimate survival times based on the mean or median survival times of observations in terminal nodes, however this would lead to biased estimations.
Therefore, research has tended to focus on relative risk predictions.

> As discussed, relative risks are arbitrary values where only the resulting rank comparing observations matters.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As discussed, relative risks are arbitrary values where only the resulting rank matters when comparing observations.
```

In RSFs, each terminal node should be as homogeneous as possible, hence within a terminal node, the risk between observation should be the same.

> Hence, one could theoretically assign a constant risk value to all terminal nodes, compare these using some concordant type metric, and shuffle repeatedly until maximum concordance is achieved.

Reviewer: I think this could be savely deleted without loosing much and just state the result from Ishwaran

However, this would clearly be cumbersome and sub-optimal.
Another approach would be to generate some heuristics based on the observations in the terminal nodes, for example the total number of events occurring in the terminal node, or the total number of events divided by the total time at risk, which gives an overall probability of the event occurring over time.

In practice, the most common method appears to be a composition from the Nelson-Aalen method [@Ishwaran2008], which exploits results from counting process to provide a measure of expected mortality [@dataapplied].
The relative risk predicted from decision tree $b$ is calculated as

$$
\phi_b := \sum_{\tau \in \calT} \hat{H}_b(\tau)
$$

> where $\calT$ is the set of unique time-points in the leaf.

Reviewer: which leaf? I think this should be \sum_h \hat{H}_{b(h)}, where the latter is from (14.3)?
